write-your-own.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Write your own!
---

Are you a government official or interested citizen who wants to draft an open-data policy for your own place or agency? You have come to the right place!

We recommend that you [explore](/browse/) the policies on this site to get a sense of the kind of language other places have used in their policies. We also have several web resources you should check out:

- [Open Data Policy Guidelines](http://sunlightfoundation.com/opendataguidelines/) — This is a set of guidelines to address: what data should be public, how to make data public, and how to implement policy.
- [Open Data Policy Wizard](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe2BeXHF-vkjbfmYRK0dIxYtWyaXUCkgG0a6twAIqRdwJM8dg/viewform) — Use this form to help you create an open-data policy! When you're done, you will get an email with your sample policy.
- [Public Policy for Public Data](http://whatworkscities.sunlightfoundation.com/) — A step-by-step checklist and resource guide for creating open-data policy.

Commit message:

Add text encouraging people to download policies

write-your-own.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Write your own!
---

Are you a government official or interested citizen who wants to draft an open-data policy for your own place or agency? You have come to the right place!

We recommend that you [explore](/browse/) the policies on this site to get a sense of the kind of language other places have used in their policies. We encourage you to [download](/downloads/) the policies and copy, paste, and remix the content as you please.

We also have several web resources you should check out:

- [Open Data Policy Guidelines](http://sunlightfoundation.com/opendataguidelines/) — This is a set of guidelines to address: what data should be public, how to make data public, and how to implement policy.
- [Open Data Policy Wizard](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe2BeXHF-vkjbfmYRK0dIxYtWyaXUCkgG0a6twAIqRdwJM8dg/viewform) — Use this form to help you create an open-data policy! When you're done, you will get an email with your sample policy.
- [Public Policy for Public Data](http://whatworkscities.sunlightfoundation.com/) — A step-by-step checklist and resource guide for creating open-data policy.
