---
place: tx
year: 2011
date: 2011-06-17
legal_custom: Legislation
sunlight: false
policy_url: http://www.legis.state.tx.us/BillLookup/Text.aspx?LegSess=82R&Bill=SB701
---

S.B. No. 701

AN ACT relating to high-value data sets of state agencies posted on the Internet.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

**SECTION 1.**  Subchapter F, Chapter 2054, Government Code, is amended by adding Section 2054.1265 to read as follows:

Sec. 2054.1265.  POSTING HIGH-VALUE DATA SETS ON INTERNET.

(a)  In this section:

1. <span class="def-data"><span class="g-goals-and-values">"High-value data set" means information that can be used to increase state agency accountability and responsiveness, improve public knowledge of the agency and its operations, further the core mission of the agency, create economic opportunity, or respond to need and demand as identified through public consultation.</span>  <span class="g-sensitive-information">The term does not include information that is confidential or protected from disclosure under state or federal law.</span></span>

2. "State agency" means a board, commission, office, department, or other agency in the executive, judicial, or legislative branch of state government. The term includes an institution of higher education as defined by Section 61.003, Education Code.

(b)  <span class="g-proactive-release"><span class="g-prioritization"><span class="g-outside-services">Each state agency shall post on a generally accessible Internet website maintained by or for the agency each high-value data set created or maintained by the agency,</span></span></span> if the agency:

1. <span class="g-prioritization"><span class="g-outside-services">determines that, using existing resources, the agency can post the data set on the Internet website at no additional cost to the state;</span></span>

2. <span class="g-prioritization"><span class="g-outside-services">enters into a contract advantageous to the state under which the contractor posts the data set on the Internet website at no additional cost to the state;</span> or</span>

3. <span class="g-prioritization">receives a gift or grant specifically for the purpose of posting one or more of the agency's high-value data sets on the Internet website.</span>

(c)  <span class="g-open-formats">A high-value data set posted by a state agency under this section must be raw data in open standard format that allows the public to search, extract, organize, and analyze the information.</span>

(d)  The web page on which a state agency's high-value data set is posted must:

1. use the agency's Internet website home page address and include the uniform resource locator suffix "data"; and

2. have a conspicuously displayed link on either the agency's Internet website home page or another intuitive location accessible from the agency's Internet website home page.

(e)  A state agency may accept a gift or grant for the purpose of posting one or more of the agency's high-value data sets on an Internet website.

**SECTION 2.**  This Act takes effect September 1, 2011.
